This one's a big one. Not even going to copy and paste the article here because it is a lot. I think it's important to point out that since we are in the digital world here, everything is arbitrary. The term "ISO" itself is arbitrary here. What we are talking about is [[exposure index]]. I find some of the terminology used in this wikipedia page confusing and somewhat incorrect - and much of it is uncited. oh joy

Summary:
- Based on an sRGB file produced by the camera should have a similar "lightness" to that of a film of "the same EI rating at the same exposure"
- EI settings are varying signal gain *before* converting to digital, but then expanded ISO ranges are given *after* by some cameras as "expanded ISO".
- There is then the interpretation of lightness values into an sRGB file - is this what you are messing with in Raw photo editing?
- 2006 spec has **5** techniques for determining [[exposure index]] for the sensitivity setting provided by the camera.

I am now direct quoting because this is shocking to me:

> The Recommended Exposure Index (REI) technique, new in the 2006 version of the standard, allows the manufacturer to specify a camera model's EI choices arbitrarily. The choices are based solely on the manufacturer's opinion of what EI values produce well-exposed sRGB images at the various sensor sensitivity settings. This is the only technique available under the standard for output formats that are not in the sRGB color space. This is also the only technique available under the standard when multi-zone metering (also called pattern metering) is used.

So uh ... yeah.

Back to the summary.

- There's also a Standard Output Sensitivity model, but it only applies to JPEG
- There's alledgedly a standard that determines if the image produced is "excelent" or "usable" 
- Cameras are supposed to report speeds based on a decision tree of some form
	- If noise based speed is higher than saturation based speed, then report noise based speed and vice versa
	- Statndard Output Sensitivity is what you are controlling, but the *actual* EI setting is still determined by the camera
	- For some entirely unclear reason white balance is involved in this? It comes up out of nowhere
- Apparently, cameras do none of this.
- And the article kinda just ends here

http://www.rps-isg.org/DF2008/DigitalPhotographyStandards.pdf

Appears to have insights into how the ISO spec was defined

https://www.dpreview.com/articles/9698391814/the-ins-and-outs-of-iso-what-is-iso

DP Review Article 

https://www.abelcine.com/articles/blog-and-knowledge/tutorials-and-guides/iso-ei-and-gain-explained
